Tire models aim to model the behavior of the tire as closely as possible.
For example, the lateral force generated looks something like
this: alpha is this slip angle and F is a lateral force.
Race car drivers have a fantastic mental model of this graph and can
usually capture optimal longitudinal or lateral force for the situation.
The slip angle is just one component used to
calculate the longitudinal and lateral forces of tires.
There is a breadth of literature dedicated to the study of tire dynamics.
We could have an entire course just on tire forces.
The most popular model is the Pacejka tire model,
also known as the Magic Tire Formula.